---
title: 2.5 Weeks and 15,000 Words in, How Am I Feeling About Thought / Day?
author: Sam Killermann
type: post
date: 2013-11-19T05:08:27+00:00
excerpt: "I hope this isn't like when you take the cake out of the oven too early and don't have a toothpick and try to test if it's done with a knife and just end up stabbing your cake to death."
url: /2-5-weeks-and-15000-words/
featured_image: /wp-content/uploads/2013/11/2-week-update.jpg
dsq_thread_id:
  - 1978218635
photo:
  - "Today's image is a modified screencap of the text editor of me making this post. Like <em>Inception</em>, but Wordpress."
categories:
  - Updates
topics:
  - Progress Report
  - Update

---
I&#8217;ve written a lot in these past few weeks of this new experiment. When I launched this site I shared a [few of my reasons why][1], but I have also been aware from the start that I really didn&#8217;t know where this project would go, and I still don&#8217;t. That&#8217;s what I like about it. Living without expectations is a good way to live.

But not knowing what&#8217;s ahead is far different than ignoring what&#8217;s behind, and I&#8217;m all about reflecting on my behind.

I really enjoy the time I spend writing and thinking and talking for this site. It&#8217;s the only place on the internet where I go without a goal in mind, and can just express what I want to express. It&#8217;s cathartic, challenging, sometimes anxiety-inducing, sometimes relaxing, and all the times fun.

I&#8217;ve shared a lot of things here that I would have probably never written down if it weren&#8217;t for this site. In the process of writing, I have also gained a better understanding of important ideas (like [this][2]). Other times, seeing the words I was writing revealed things to myself that I didn&#8217;t quite know (like [this][3]). And other times nothing has necessarily come from the thought of the day, other than the ritual of sitting behind my keyboard and creating &#8212; but that, in itself, is _something_. I have a podcast on iTunes now! (what?!) I got an article picked up by a big online publication! (I still have no idea how that happened, but it was a shocker) Oh, and I broke the T key on my keyboard, so that&#8217;s somehing!

It feels like I&#8217;ve grown a large amount of person-ness in a small amount of time.

And after this past weekend, where I was engaged in a 48-hour straight hyperactive game marathon charity fundraiser extravaganza, and _still _managed to think / day (and didn&#8217;t even once consider letting it slip), I think I&#8217;m in this for the long run.

Thanks to everyone who has shared their thoughts with me so far. I&#8217;m looking forward to seeing what this turns into, and I&#8217;ll be happy to have you along for the ride.

Now I&#8217;m going to sleep for a couple days,

sKKKKZZZZZZZZZZ

 [1]: //welcome/ "Welcome to Sam Killermann’s Thought / Day"
 [2]: //us-vs-them/ "Making a Bigger “Us” and a Smaller “Them”"
 [3]: //hiding-behind-a-keyboard/ "Hiding Behind a Keyboard: The Terror of the Unknown"