---
title: Welcome to Sam Killermann’s Thought / Day
author: Sam Killermann
type: post
date: 2013-10-29T19:26:36+00:00
excerpt: "For one year (at least), I'm going to share a thought a day. These thoughts will be presented in a variety of formats (articles, lists, videos, comics, haiku, interpretive pancake eating) & on a variety of subjects (see: all), but I will follow 1 rule: I'll update every 24 hours."
url: /welcome/
featured_image: /wp-content/uploads/2013/10/sam-killermann-30-rock.jpg
dsq_thread_id:
  - 1959516905
photo:
  - "That's a photo of me on top of 30 Rock in New York City back in '11, after touring SNL's studios. It was a wild experience for me. And it's while I was in NYC a few days before writing this post that I decided to start this project."
ampforwp-amp-on-off:
  - default
categories:
  - Updates
tags:
  - Progress Report
  - Sam
  - Update

---
_I created this because it&#8217;s been a long time coming, and I decided to stop letting time slip away._

People have asked again and again if I have a personal blog. I do not. Well, I _did _not. I do now. And I will keep it up for at least one year. 365 days. 12 months. And probably about 500,000 words.<!--more-->

_I created this because time is slipping away._

I don&#8217;t have much of a regimen, or ritual. My life is an adventure without a clock, and most of the things I work on aren&#8217;t bound by any external time constraints. This puts me in a world where Mondays blur into Thursdays, and Octobers blur into Spring.

_I created this to be more mindful of my day-to-day for myself &#8212; to keep a record, so to speak &#8212; but also to share my day-to-day with you._

I look forward to looking back at this site &#8212; a year from now, three years from now &#8212; the way I can look back at my year recorded in photos three years back (here&#8217;s <a href="http://killermann.tumblr.com/post/470807606/im-going-to-give-this-project-365-thing-an-honest" target="_blank">the first one</a>) when I was learning how to use a camera, and relearning how to look at the world. I&#8217;ll think of this year as learning how to write, and relearning how to look at my life.

{{< subscribe >}}
But I also look forward to sharing a bit of myself beyond my projects &#8212; things I&#8217;ve created that have lessened the degree of separation between me and millions around the world to 1, yet for almost all of my one-degree-of-separation friends around the world, neither of us are aware of the other person as a _person._ I&#8217;m <a href="http://itspronouncedmetrosexual.com" target="_blank">metrosexual</a>, a personal <a href="http://thesafezoneproject.com" target="_blank">safe zone</a>, a <a href="http://guidetogender.com" target="_blank">social justice advocate</a>, a <a href="http://gamersagainstbigotry.org" target="_blank">gamer against bigotry</a>, etc., but those far better describe _things I&#8217;ve done_ than _who I am_. I hope this will help re-person me.

_I created this to share the thoughts that keep my mind spinning._

I spend a lot of time in bed processing things that I think matter &#8212; but they stay there, in my head, slightly processed. I want to put those ideas into the world, have you help me process them, and see what can be made of them. Ideas worth sharing, <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NRcPXtqdKjE" target="_blank">ya know</a>?

_I created this to share the thoughts that keep my face smiling._

Because life doesn&#8217;t have to be all serious, and you should never ask for permission to smile.

_Stay tuned. This is going to be an interesting year._