---
title: Suffering Points
author: Sam Killermann
type: post
date: 2019-04-08T18:02:02+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1386
categories:
  - Updates

---
We often compare the suffering of one person, or one group, with another. Or we compare someone else&#8217;s suffering with our own. Both are misguided, based on a flawed premise: that the &#8220;amount&#8221; of suffering anyone experiences is universal and comparable.

When I say suffering here, I&#8217;m not speaking directly to the Buddhist concept (so no worries if you&#8217;re not familiar), but I do think the Buddha&#8217;s teachings on suffering helped inform this viewpoint for me ([so read up, if you&#8217;re curious][1]). 

By &#8220;suffering&#8221; I simply mean any of the range of negative emotions one might experience, from discomfort on the low end to agonizing pain on the high end.

I like the word &#8220;suffering&#8221; because it sums up a lot of different ways that this idea is evoked, both in interpersonal situations and in political debates.

While people don&#8217;t often use the word itself in those situations, they&#8217;re still talking about suffering. Even when they exchange it for words like &#8220;violence,&#8221; &#8220;pain,&#8221; &#8220;trauma,&#8221; &#8220;misery,&#8221; &#8220;oppression,&#8221; or &#8220;subjugation&#8221; (to name a few).

We can think of suffering as being the opposite of thriving, health, or well-being.

Hopefully that all makes sense and doesn&#8217;t ruffle any feathers. I just want to make sure we&#8217;re on the same page, at least to start.

Now, here&#8217;s where things get tricky.

The ways we talk about suffering (when we&#8217;re using those other words to refer to it), often follow a pattern:

  1. Someone (or a group of someones) is suffering
  2. Their suffering is caused by someone else (or a different group of someones) or something else
  3. We need to prioritize remedying this someone&#8217;s suffering

And when there&#8217;s pushback on #3 &#8212; for example, calls to prioritize other people/group&#8217;s suffering, or a dismissal of this seriousness of this person/group&#8217;s suffering &#8212; we enter a scoring contest where the winner is the person who scores the most suffering points.

&#8220;Person 1 has it worse because X, Y, and Z.&#8221; _3 points, plus a bonus point for the combo._

&#8220;Actually, it&#8217;s not that bad because historically Person A has had everything handed to them.&#8221; _Minus two points for historical non-suffering. Person 1 has a current score of 2 suffering points._

&#8220;Actually-actually, Person 2 has it worse, because X, Y, and Z are all true for them, and so is A, B, and C.&#8221; _Out of the blue, Person 2 sweeps in with 8 suffering points. Ding ding ding we have a winner._

The problem with this pattern, and the debates it inevitably leads to, is the unquestioned assumption that undergirds the whole thing: the idea that &#8220;amount of suffering&#8221; is somehow universal, and comparable between two different people.

If I have $5, and you have $1, I have more money than you. Easy-peasy. No question there. 

And if we were to trade, me giving you my five-dollar-bill, and you giving me your one, then the reverse would be true. You&#8217;d now have more money than me. No question.

Money is universal and easily comparable.

$5 is $5 in my hands or yours. It&#8217;s still $5 even if it&#8217;s been in my pocket for a month. It&#8217;s $5 whether I&#8217;m hungry or sated, cold or warm, terrified or unafraid. And it&#8217;s always worth more than $1.

This, however, _is not_ how suffering works. Here are a few reasons why suffering is not universal and comparable: 

  1. **If we trade sufferings, the values change.** What&#8217;s agonizing for one person might be a minor discomfort for someone else; one person&#8217;s pain might be another person&#8217;s pleasure.
  2. **Suffering is influenced by exposure.** If you&#8217;ve experienced a particular form of suffering regularly, the intensity of your suffering in the face of that gradually declines. On the other hand, if you&#8217;ve never experienced a particular form of suffering, your first meeting will likely be severe.
  3. **Context creates suffering.** In many cases, the experience, interaction, event itself matters less than the situation in which it occurs.

Let&#8217;s run through an example.

A two-year-old drops her ice cream cone and starts bawling. We&#8217;ve all seen it (even if only as a pop culture cliché). She&#8217;s clearly suffering. Though, how much?

By conventional wisdom, we&#8217;d say this isn&#8217;t a big deal. She&#8217;s crying over spilled (iced) milk. &#8220;We can buy you another ice cream cone.&#8221; &#8220;It&#8217;s just ice cream.&#8221; &#8220;Dust it off, it&#8217;ll be okay.&#8221;

We might try to put ourselves in her shoes. (&#8220;I wouldn&#8217;t be that worked up over something so small.&#8221;) 

Or relate to a time when we&#8217;ve dropped our ice cream. (&#8220;I remember doing that. It&#8217;s the worst.&#8221;) 

Or focus on another issue altogether, downplaying the severity of her suffering. (&#8220;It&#8217;s a beautiful day. At least you got to have ice cream to begin with!&#8221;)

But all of those responses suggest that the above three points aren&#8217;t true. They reinforce the idea that suffering is exchangeable, and would hold the same severity experienced by different people. That exposure doesn&#8217;t matter. That context is irrelevant.

For us, we realize that life is full of dropping ice cream cones. For a lot of people, life is basically _all_ dropped ice cream cones, with the occasional lick of ice cream.

But for her this might be &#8212; _literally_ &#8212; the worst thing that&#8217;s ever happened in her life.

By comparing her suffering to what we might experience in her shoes, we&#8217;re propping up a lie. We&#8217;re not actually putting ourselves in her shoes.

Because if we did &#8212; if we actually put ourselves in her shoes, matched her exposure to this type of pain, and recreated the context, hopes, expectations, and history that led to this moment &#8212; we&#8217;d be bawling too. 

How do I know this? Simple: because that&#8217;s how she&#8217;s reacting. That&#8217;s the severity of the suffering she&#8217;s experiencing. So if you were her, you&#8217;d be reacting that way too.

If we limited suffering to a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being the most severe suffering you&#8217;ve ever experienced, and 1 being the most minor, ice cream dropping is (for the time being) this toddler&#8217;s 10. She&#8217;s never known worse. Clumsiness and a sweet tooth are the architects of her personal hell.

For me, and (I&#8217;m going to go out on a limb here) ice cream dropping isn&#8217;t a 10.

Considering you&#8217;re reading this, you&#8217;re not likely a two-year-old. And (even though I wish this weren&#8217;t true) you&#8217;ve likely experienced things that make ice cream dropping a 1. 

So, if you&#8217;re with me that this toddler is experiencing extreme suffering, you might encounter a few questions in your mind TK

If we want to keep taking score of suffering points, I suggest the following revisions: 

  1. We recognize and honor the individual-ness of suffering. Things like exposure to a negative experience, and the context within which it happens will influence how severely. 
  2. TK

 [1]: https://www.zen-buddhism.net/buddhist-principles/four-noble-truths.html